.rn '' }`
''' $RCSfile$$Revision$$Date$
'''
''' $Log$
'''
.de Sh
.br
.if t .Sp
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.de Ip
.br
.ie \\n(.$>=3 .ne \\$3
.el .ne 3
.IP "\\$1" \\$2
..
.de Vb
.ft CW
.nf
.ne \\$1
..
.de Ve
.ft R

.fi
..
'''
'''
'''     Set up \*(-- to give an unbreakable dash;
'''     string Tr holds user defined translation string.
'''     Bell System Logo is used as a dummy character.
'''
.tr \(*W-|\(bv\*(Tr
.ie n \{\
.ds -- \(*W-
.ds PI pi
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=24u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-12u'-\" diablo 10 pitch
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=20u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-8u'-\" diablo 12 pitch
.ds L" ""
.ds R" ""
'''   \*(M", \*(S", \*(N" and \*(T" are the equivalent of
'''   \*(L" and \*(R", except that they are used on ".xx" lines,
'''   such as .IP and .SH, which do another additional levels of
'''   double-quote interpretation
.ds M" """
.ds S" """
.ds N" """""
.ds T" """""
.ds L' '
.ds R' '
.ds M' '
.ds S' '
.ds N' '
.ds T' '
'br\}
.el\{\
.ds -- \(em\|
.tr \*(Tr
.ds L" ``
.ds R" ''
.ds M" ``
.ds S" ''
.ds N" ``
.ds T" ''
.ds L' `
.ds R' '
.ds M' `
.ds S' '
.ds N' `
.ds T' '
.ds PI \(*p
'br\}
.\"	If the F register is turned on, we'll generate
.\"	index entries out stderr for the following things:
.\"		TH	Title 
.\"		SH	Header
.\"		Sh	Subsection 
.\"		Ip	Item
.\"		X<>	Xref  (embedded
.\"	Of course, you have to process the output yourself
.\"	in some meaninful fashion.
.if \nF \{
.de IX
.tm Index:\\$1\t\\n%\t"\\$2"
..
.nr % 0
.rr F
.\}
.TH RRDUPDATE 1 "19990426.22" "7/Mar/99" "rrdtool"
.UC
.if n .hy 0
.if n .na
.ds C+ C\v'-.1v'\h'-1p'\s-2+\h'-1p'+\s0\v'.1v'\h'-1p'
.de CQ          \" put $1 in typewriter font
.ft CW
'if n "\c
'if t \\&\\$1\c
'if n \\&\\$1\c
'if n \&"
\\&\\$2 \\$3 \\$4 \\$5 \\$6 \\$7
'.ft R
..
.\" @(#)ms.acc 1.5 88/02/08 SMI; from UCB 4.2
.	\" AM - accent mark definitions
.bd B 3
.	\" fudge factors for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds #H 0
.	ds #V .8m
.	ds #F .3m
.	ds #[ \f1
.	ds #] \fP
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds #H ((1u-(\\\\n(.fu%2u))*.13m)
.	ds #V .6m
.	ds #F 0
.	ds #[ \&
.	ds #] \&
.\}
.	\" simple accents for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds ' \&
.	ds ` \&
.	ds ^ \&
.	ds , \&
.	ds ~ ~
.	ds ? ?
.	ds ! !
.	ds /
.	ds q
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds ' \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\'\h"|\\n:u"
.	ds ` \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\`\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'^\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds , \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)',\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu-\*(#H-.1m)'~\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ? \s-2c\h'-\w'c'u*7/10'\u\h'\*(#H'\zi\d\s+2\h'\w'c'u*8/10'
.	ds ! \s-2\(or\s+2\h'-\w'\(or'u'\v'-.8m'.\v'.8m'
.	ds / \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\z\(sl\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds q o\h'-\w'o'u*8/10'\s-4\v'.4m'\z\(*i\v'-.4m'\s+4\h'\w'o'u*8/10'
.\}
.	\" troff and (daisy-wheel) nroff accents
.ds : \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H+.1m+\*(#F)'\v'-\*(#V'\z.\h'.2m+\*(#F'.\h'|\\n:u'\v'\*(#V'
.ds 8 \h'\*(#H'\(*b\h'-\*(#H'
.ds v \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\v'-\*(#V'\*(#[\s-4v\s0\v'\*(#V'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds _ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H+(\*(#F*2/3))'\v'-.4m'\z\(hy\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds . \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)'\v'\*(#V*4/10'\z.\v'-\*(#V*4/10'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds 3 \*(#[\v'.2m'\s-2\&3\s0\v'-.2m'\*(#]
.ds o \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu+\w'\(de'u-\*(#H)/2u'\v'-.3n'\*(#[\z\(de\v'.3n'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds d- \h'\*(#H'\(pd\h'-\w'~'u'\v'-.25m'\f2\(hy\fP\v'.25m'\h'-\*(#H'
.ds D- D\\k:\h'-\w'D'u'\v'-.11m'\z\(hy\v'.11m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds th \*(#[\v'.3m'\s+1I\s-1\v'-.3m'\h'-(\w'I'u*2/3)'\s-1o\s+1\*(#]
.ds Th \*(#[\s+2I\s-2\h'-\w'I'u*3/5'\v'-.3m'o\v'.3m'\*(#]
.ds ae a\h'-(\w'a'u*4/10)'e
.ds Ae A\h'-(\w'A'u*4/10)'E
.ds oe o\h'-(\w'o'u*4/10)'e
.ds Oe O\h'-(\w'O'u*4/10)'E
.	\" corrections for vroff
.if v .ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\s-2\u~\d\s+2\h'|\\n:u'
.if v .ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'\v'-.4m'^\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.	\" for low resolution devices (crt and lpr)
.if \n(.H>23 .if \n(.V>19 \
\{\
.	ds : e
.	ds 8 ss
.	ds v \h'-1'\o'\(aa\(ga'
.	ds _ \h'-1'^
.	ds . \h'-1'.
.	ds 3 3
.	ds o a
.	ds d- d\h'-1'\(ga
.	ds D- D\h'-1'\(hy
.	ds th \o'bp'
.	ds Th \o'LP'
.	ds ae ae
.	ds Ae AE
.	ds oe oe
.	ds Oe OE
.\}
.rm #[ #] #H #V #F C
.SH "NAME"
rrdtool update \- Store a new set of values into the rrd
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
\fBrrdtool\fR \fBupdate\fR \fIfilename\fR 
[\fB--template\fR|\fB\-t\fR\ \fIds-name\fR[\fB:\fR\fIds-name\fR]...] 
\fBN\fR|\fItimestamp\fR\fB:\fR\fIvalue\fR[\fB:\fR\fIvalue\fR...] 
[\fItimestamp\fR\fB:\fR\fIvalue\fR[\fB:\fR\fIvalue\fR...]\ ...]
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
The \fBupdate\fR function feeds new data values into an \fBRRD\fR. The
data gets time aligned according to the properties of the \fBRRD\fR to
which the data is written.
.Ip "\fIfilename\fR" 8
The name of the \fB\s-1RRD\s0\fR you want to update.
.Ip "\fB--template\fR|\fB\-t\fR \fIds-name\fR[\fB:\fR\fIds-name\fR]..." 8
by default, the update function expects the data input in the order,
the data sources are defined in the \s-1RRD\s0. This is not very error
resistant, as you might be sending the wrong data into a \s-1RRD\s0.
.Sp
The template switch alows you to specify which data sources you are
going to update and in which order. If the datasources specified in
the template are not available in the rrd file, the update process
will abort with an error message.
.Ip "\fBN\fR|\fItimestamp\fR\fB:\fR\fIvalue\fR[\fB:\fR\fIvalue\fR...]" 8
The data used for updating the \s-1RRD\s0 was acquired at a certain time. This
time can either be defined in seconds since 1970-01-01. Or by using the
letter \*(L'N\*(R' the update time is set to be the current time. Negative time
values are subtracted from the current time.
Getting the timing right to the second is especially
important when you are working with data-sources of type \fB\s-1COUNTER\s0\fR,
\fB\s-1DERIVE\s0\fR or \fB\s-1ABSOLUTE\s0\fR. 
.Sp
The remaining elements of the argument are \s-1DS\s0 updates. The order of this list is
the same as the order the datasources were defined in the rra.
If there is no data for a certain data-source, the letter 
\fBU\fR (eg. N:0.1:U:1) can be defined.
.Sp
The format of the value acquired from the datasource is dependent of the
datasource type chosen. Normally it will be numeric, but the data acquisition
modules my impose their very own parsing of this parameter as long as the colon
(\fB:\fR) remains the datasource value separator.
.SH "EXAMPLE"
\f(CWrrdtool update demo1.rrd N:3.44:3.15:U:23\fR
.PP
Update the database file demo1.rrd with 3 known and one \fI*UNKNOWN*\fR
value. Use the current time as the update time.
.PP
\f(CWrrdtool update demo2.rrd 887457267:U 887457521:22 88745790:2.7\fR
.PP
Update the database file demo2.rrd which expects data from a single
data-source, three times. First with an \fI*UNKNOWN*\fR value then with two
normal readings. The update interval seems to be around 300 seconds.
.SH "AUTHOR"
Tobias Oetiker <oetiker@ee.ethz.ch>

.rn }` ''
.IX Title "RRDUPDATE 1"
.IX Name "rrdtool update - Store a new set of values into the rrd"

.IX Header "NAME"

.IX Header "SYNOPSIS"

.IX Header "DESCRIPTION"

.IX Item "\fIfilename\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--template\fR|\fB\-t\fR \fIds-name\fR[\fB:\fR\fIds-name\fR]..."

.IX Item "\fBN\fR|\fItimestamp\fR\fB:\fR\fIvalue\fR[\fB:\fR\fIvalue\fR...]"

.IX Header "EXAMPLE"

.IX Header "AUTHOR"

